No, no, you'll arrive... Before the telephone call, we were talking about which countries had been supporting the development.
Well, of course, the biggest contributor to the International Agricultural Network was USAID, the U.S.
government.
That, I think, is...
And in the beginning, it was absolutely necessary.
They committed themselves to support one quarter of the budget of the system.
But at that time, this was back in 1970.
I think that the network, or the Consultative Group on International Agriculture, as it's called now.
It has a small secretariat in the World Bank.
And it has a technical advisory committee.
They hold an annual meeting called Centers Weeks where all of the centers previously, they have submitted the budget proposal and the Secretariat looks at it and tries to keep the balance, reasonably good balance between the different institutes depending on the crops so that one doesn't get too much more of the pie, although there are differences in the importance
food crops as it relates to the total number of people then.
They try to keep it pretty well balanced.
And then at this centers week, the director presents his program, a summary of what happened last year, what the plans are for the future, and the budget are there that are passed around.
At this centers week, most of the donor country representatives are all of them.
who have not become donors.
And in addition, there are a certain number from the outside, but they try to keep it to a working group.
It's not open to the general public because then it becomes unmanageable.
But anyone can obtain permission to attend that's truly interested, donor or potential donor.
Then they discuss these different programs openly.
The directors and their staff have to defend their positions.
Then the pledges are made for the forthcoming year.
And if the global figure is inadequate, then there has to be adjustments in each budget.
In addition to this global sum of money,
There are special, which we call core funds.
There are special project funds.
If some government wants to do a special project, then that has to be funded on the outside by that particular agency.
And there are some of those.
And some of them give, well, monies for grants for training.
But many of them identify the country.
For example, NORAD is the Norwegian Foreign Technical Assistance.
They specify which countries they will support students from at CIMIT or at ERI.
I don't remember just which they are, but it's Bangladesh, Pakistan, Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique.
Maybe one or two others, I don't recall.
They can specify.
And those funds are going to pay the cost of the training and travel fellowship for these hands-on control programs.
Now, of course, this whole question of
I remember in 1970, before this was established, when I came back from Stockholm, or from Oslo, there was a press conference in New York, and Dr. Robert Rockefeller Foundation, F.F.
Hill, Vice President of Ford Foundation, John Hanna of the USAID at that time, were the main participants on the podium.
Since they were the funding agency at that time, there were only three.
And the government of Mexico in kind in Mexico.
Those were four that were giving anything to Simmons.
And that was throughout all of the 1970s then?
No, no.
This was just in 1970 when I came back.
It was a pretty big press conference and all of the old veterans of the press, you know what some of them were like, they wanted to know how the hell this came about, the Nobel Prize for the so-called Green Revolution.
What was its significance?
What was the prize saying?
And Herrera spoke first and John Hanna and
And I was the last one up there.
I was the one that got all of these nasty questions.
I said, wow.
I explained to him what the production had been in the period from 60 to 60.
A little brief background on the Mexican thing, what happened there.
But mostly because the focus was on the hunger and misery of that time in Pakistan and India.
And what had happened and why had it happened.
I remember one old veteran, I don't remember his name at the moment, but he said, how much is this boondoggle costing?
That's what he called it?
A boondoggle?
Well, pretty much.
I don't remember the exact word.
Not a neutral word for a reporter.
No, but I said, well, it costs about the total network.
of which there were four in the beginning then.
Erie and Simit were operating in Siyate, Tropical Center in Columbia, and Iita, the International Center of Tropics in Nigeria, were building.
And I said, the total budget last year for those four was two Phantom Jet Fighters.
And boy, right after that, you had them all in your hands.
You could see the whole thing change.
And what a perfect time to say it, too.
Right while we're getting out of Vietnam and the American people are upset with the expenditure of the military.
And then there were a lot of questions about details and how it come to be, but in an entirely different environment.
I don't know how I pulled that one out, but it was very timely.
Now let's talk a little bit about Americans.
And so then these others came on the screen.
And now the funding is very... There are somewhere around 39 countries that give funds to the system.
And in addition to those, most of them are Western world, but they have to qualify because Japanese are big contributors.
And more recently,
Saudi Arabia has been giving us token amounts.
The Shah, when he was still in Iran, he was the first to start giving funds.
Of course, that all went down the drain when he went.
India and Mexico have given token amounts to the system, quite apart from the in-kind, the land and stuff.
There may be some others more recently, but especially those two.
The World Bank and the United Nations Development Program put money into the system.
FAO is involved, but since it's not a budgeting agency, it has to be funded from elsewhere, but it's a participant in the system.
Unfortunately, it contributes a lot of the bureaucracies as well.
Okay, now let's talk a little bit about
funding.
Recently in the news, there's been a lot of discussion about the United Nations, UNESCO, and the slant, the type of, well, their critics would say the type of propaganda that the American public was paying for before Reagan pulled us out of that.
My question is, dealing with Simmons, when the United States to a USAID would give money
Was there any political pressure?
Did you perceive of any?
Or any other countries?
When other countries gave money, did you perceive of any political pressures?
We never accepted money under political pressures.
Were there offers under political pressures?
Well, these things live and flow.
For example, at the present time, with the surpluses that exist in the U.S.,
of commodities, wheat, corn, soybeans.
And the farmers under duress is when you get these pressures exerted.
They don't come directly to us, but they come against USAID, who funds us.
And I have a letter here right now.
This happens to come from the Rockefeller Foundation, a new guy that's in handling their biotechnology because there's no agriculture program any longer in the Foundation.
But I've worked one month a year for him doing special things.
says, maybe I shouldn't next year put my effort down in Argentina since they're a food exporting country.
In other words, he's been listening to this noise.
And I was just about ready to dictate the answer today that from day one, when Dr. Herrera started this program, we were subjected to criticism in Mexico
way back in the mid-40s, by traveling US senators and congressmen saying, what the hell are we doing?
Destroying the US markets.
And his answer and my answer today were the same.
Beggars are poor customers.
The hungry, poverty-stricken parts of the world are not good consumers, are not good customers.
They have no money.
And in those countries where 80 to 90% of the population is on the land in a subsistence agriculture,
The only way that they can increase their purchasing power and alleviate part of their poverty and misery is by producing more agricultural produce to sell, to feed the urban population, which is the privilege sector of those societies.
And hopefully, with that additional income, be able to buy some things as simple as a transistor, radio, and a bicycle, and a sewing machine eventually, some simple farm tools.
Maybe something in from America.
Exactly.
This is the way it all starts moving.
And one of my great frustrations is that as soon as, not just the US, but I think the US probably
more so than the others, because they have never gone through a period of hunger like European countries did in World War II.
There are still a few of the old veterans around that remember what the hell it was like when there was no food.
The same in Japan.
And so you don't get this in the same way, but the U.S.
has never been hungry.
Our Canadian natives, of course, have never been hungry.
But I think that they are much less inclined to start talking about this when these surplus is built.
But of course, they don't have any surplus.
They've been able to sell everything they produce because of some internal policies that we have that I think are completely irrealistic.
This high trigger price before grain can be released from government
stockpiles for sale, either domestically or in international trade, was hopefully to provide a more stable and better income for our own domestic farmers.
But it wasn't realistically related to international prices for those commodities.
The result is that we've been building those huge surpluses.
We're going to get to the whole issue of price supports and America farm crisis today and those issues, but I want to give us back on USAID.
This is what has put pressures now on USAID and indirectly on some of the institutes like CIMAT.
Maybe you shouldn't be working so much, especially in countries that suddenly have become food exporters.
For example, China and India are now food exporters, wheat exporters.
Argentina.
Argentina has always been.
And the reason I started working there is that I figured 25 years ago it was the only country that could be a major food exporter in Latin America to supply many of the other countries of Latin America when the time came.
Well, you're fine.
Go ahead.
Well, I was simply going to say that now the big fight is on in a sort of war of...
trade war between U.S.
and agricultural produce and the European Common Market.
But who gets squeezed?
China and India.
Now they've got surpluses.
But they can't compete in the world market when the U.S.
says, alright, we'll sell you at this price with credit for six months.
India can't give credit for six months.
You see?
There's two sides to these issues.
The fight between the European Common Market and the US is, there's a lot of gray there about who started what because we've been guilty also of this internal pricing.
But they have subsidized their producers and so it ends up in a kind of a nasty trade war or the beginning of one.
And the victims really are some that have finally scrambled up with
fingernails and toenails to producing what they need plus a little more, hopefully, with which they could buy certain other things.
For example, they could export wheat and rice, especially wheat, China and India, and buy more edible oil, soybean oil, these kinds of things that they don't produce in sufficient quantities.
But it gets all gummed up.
Unfortunately, many of our own, we can talk about that later, our own farmer groups don't understand.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
But now your friend at Rockefeller is going to say, I mean, just to play the devil's advocate, he'll say something while, you know, Argentina isn't starving.
Why don't you go to Bangladesh and sell them?
Is that the type of... We're in Bangladesh.
And I say the surpluses of today are temporary.
Can't say whether they're three years or five years.
The People's Republic of China with that huge population pressure, and India too for that matter,
Ten years down the road, it isn't going to be in the shape it's in right now, exporting rice and wheat.
As I see it.
There's no way of predicting.
You can have all the computers and the best ones in the world and you're still operating on the hypotheses about how fast that internal consumption picture is going to change, how much more meat they're going to
consume, which in turn will mean more grain use converted to heat production, feed for milk and eggs and meat and the whole gamut of things.
But all the computers in the world, as we saw last Tuesday, don't prevent certain unpredictable and unexpected things from happening, like in the rocket.
So we have hypotheses and we have lots of nice models that we check out.
But a lot of this is pretty hazy because a lot of it has to do with the mental attitudes of people.
Are they convinced?
There's not a very good way of measuring these factors.
Okay, let's go back to the 1970s and the focus here.
We've got the rise of, to recapitulate, we have the rise of disease resistance.
That's one of the main aims, the development of wheat nurseries on a worldwide basis and the growth of simmet.
and a fraternity of wheat scientists.
And the development of a world fraternity of wheat scientists.
Are there any other major focuses of the 1970s and your life too?
Yes, we began to also work on developing varieties that would fit adverse soil conditions, acid soils.
Okay, let's start.
with certain degree of aluminum tolerance, like in Brazil.
In the shuttle breeding operation from Brazil to Mexico, supplemented with... I don't think you've described that.
Well, let me say this.
In both wheat and in rice, and for that matter, in any crops, there are a lot of soils that...
are deficient in nutrients which you try to correct by supplying those nutrients in the form of chemical fertilizer or organic fertilizer.
And of course the amount of organic fertilizer that's available is limited.
But there are other soils where there are toxic levels of certain nutrients or of certain elements which restrict the growth or yield of the crop.
For example, in Brazil, those soils are old.
They've been highly leached over long geologic periods.
The calcium has been removed and the magnesium.
The result is that they're very acid.
And when that happens, the phosphate that is in the soil is fixed on the iron compounds and unavailable to the plants.
But the first problem is aluminum toxicity.
And the ordinary wheats, arsenic wheats, just many of them would die when they were just emerging.
A few of them would head and produce very miserable yields.
On the other hand, a couple of old pioneer Brazilian wheat breeders, Piva was one of the first
And Beckman, who was a Swede who went to Brazil right after he finished the University of Lund, spent his life there, passed away a few years ago.
They selected out some types that would tolerate these very acid soils.
But they were low in yield.
Beckman especially had selected some types that had rather good disease resistance.
especially against the rust, not against certain other diseases.
And so about, I suppose eight or nine, ten years ago, we began collaborating with both the National Wheat Program in Brazil, of Imbrapa, as well as with two farmer groups that had their own research program.
One at Cruz Alta in very acid soils where John Gibra, who had once been a member of our team, was working for these farmers' co-ops and one over in the state of Paranat.
And we crossed those best old Brazilian varieties that were tolerant to the soil condition, aluminum tolerance, with a number of our best Mexican weeds
did very poorly there, but had high yield potential.
Then we selected the first segregating generation under Mexican conditions, heavy disease epidemics in Sonora, and I personally selected those.
The best plants in quite a few of these, I spent, I guess, a week at this, picking all the best plants.
from the standpoint of how they tailored and their agronomic types whether the farmers would accept them selected thrashed them selected the grain of the best ones and then we divided the grains from each plant into four groups four different envelopes one went to
Paso Fundo, where the Imprapa headquarters were in Brazil, one to Cruz Alta, which is very acid soil for Gibraltar was, and another group to Paraná, also a farmer's co-op, where they had different, they had acid soil also.
And we planted the fourth envelope in our high valleys in Toluca, which is pretty much neutral soil, but where it rains heavily every day during the summer season.
We had it worked out so that the three Brazilian research stations would telex us which rows were homozygous, uniformly resistant or tolerant to the aluminum.
They were growing normally.
And in Toluca where we couldn't see this, we had the duplicate rows, the same rows.
We would forget about all of those rows that were segregating where you had both kind or that were susceptible.
And we would only select for disease resistance and good plant type in those rows that were homozygous resistant based on the telex information from the three places in Brazil.
And we would harvest the seed of those best plants, take them to Sonora, which is alkaline soil plant in October.
Meanwhile, from those three locations in Brazil, they would select the best plants that they saw, not only in the ones that were tolerant, but in rows that were segregating, both were tolerant and susceptible, all the good plants.
They would send part of that seed to us in Sonora and plant it there, in Ayaka and so on.
Meanwhile, we developed a little technique to speed this up.
Right in Mexico, in Eva Viegas' biochemical laboratory, we got set up so that the new cross, you make the cross and you grow the plant.
And the first generation, those seedlings will be intermediate between the two parents.
But you harvest the seed of these intermediate, or this first generation from the cross.
The next time you plant them, they're all different.
So we would take the seed of the second generation.
We would germinate them on screens in a nutrient solution in the laboratory.
And when the roots were about so long, we would wash them off and then lift the whole tray and put the roots.
In a buffered solution of aluminum at about, I think originally we used 45 parts per million.
Leave it there 18 hours, wash off the roots.
And then we would stain at the roots with hematoxylen.
The dead tissues turned brown.
And the ones that have not been damaged stay white.
We wash this out, put them back in the nutrient solution.
And after three days, we would leave those that were regrowing at the point.
And those were tolerant, and we would transplant those pots in the greenhouse from those.
We didn't have to go back to Brazil every time.
In other words, we could plant those after we got the seed from those.
in Toluca or in Sonora, and feel pretty sure that we, most of them would be tolerant to aluminum under Argentine, Brazilian condition.
Of course, meanwhile, we kept moving, shuttling their material back and forth.
The result is that today, the commercial varieties in Brazil, new ones that came from this technique, are probably yielding nearly
80% more than the whole variety by the combination... Increase to 80%?
Almost doubled?
When they're properly grown.
Exactly.
Under ideal conditions.
It's still low yield compared to Mexican conditions, but a big step forward.
And that's in the first cycle.
We think this can be done.
In rice, they're finding the same sort of thing.
Now you could correct this.
But you would have to put on four to five tons of lime per acre.
Because they're that acid and it's poorly buffered.
And it's simpler to go this way.
Now that doesn't mean that there won't be some liming going on.
Because in the case of the soybeans, they've already started to lime some of those soils because the soybeans will produce nearly double with lime.
The lime does two things.
Those soils are highly leached of calcium so that they're actually short of calcium as an essential nutrient.
And magnesium, which is part of the molecule of the chlorophyll.
And in dolomitic limestone you have both calcium and magnesium.
So you supply these.
But the lime also changes the pH so that you've got
Three possible effects.
Generally when we lime our Midwestern soils to correct acidity, there's enough calcium present in those so that from and magnesium under most of them.
That's not limiting.
The acid condition is what you're liming for.
But in some of those extreme cases like down there, you've got both.
Deficiency of calcium and magnesium as a nutrient plus
need to change the pH so this is a new thing that's happening now in the case of rice especially we well we find minor nutrients deficiencies also zinc for example we begin to see this in India fairly early I'm sure that we can find different genetic differences
But I don't think it's necessary because a few ounces of zinc sulfate, a fraction of a pound mixed with the other fertilizer takes care of it.
It's probably easier to handle it that way.
But when it comes to these toxic substances, it may be different.
Or as time goes on, you may say, all right, I guess we need to select out types that are resistant or that
have the ability to extract zinc when it's limiting for the ordinary varieties.
It could be copper.
There are soils which are deficient in zinc and copper to a point where you have to put it on, especially on grasses and in rice, or your yields are greatly suppressed.
When you get into those minor, or into those deficiencies of minor nutrients, if you develop a variety,
that has this ability to extract enough so that it yields well when the other varieties do not.
It will take you several years to find out whether this is a one or two or three shot deal, that they're able to extract it, but that they too will reach a point where they cannot extract it.
In other words, it will depend on how fast
the basic raw material of the soil is liberating additional zinc or copper.
And whether it is fast enough, even with the higher yields that the variety that has the ability to extract this nutrient when others do not, will deplete it to a level where again you've got the same situation.
If that's the case, then you need to add these.
But most of these minor nutrients, they're small quantities and they're not expensive.
Now has the Brazilian experiments, the soil experiments been used in other areas internationally?
Or have they had an upshot on other areas?
Paraguay is using them.
As a matter of fact, empirically, in Paraguay we could see this
before we were entirely clear of it in Brazil.
So there you could use it.
And I'm sure that there's some other parts of the world where, for example, even though we don't work there, Zimbabwe has these kinds of soils.
And some of the Mexican weeds moved in there.
We never had staff there, but they moved in.
South Africa has these kinds of soils.
grown there.
They went to the university and many of these things became commercial variety.
Both Zimbabwe and this was before it became Zimbabwe but about the same time when we started working in India and Pakistan, small samples through requests from a professor went to
Southern Rhodesia then, now Zimbabwe, and another to a professor at the University of South Africa.
These became a commercial bride.
So there's no international borders on these kinds of things.
Political ideologies have nothing to do with it either.
They transcend this.
What works.
And in the same way,
many of these things.
The first Mexican wheat, early, probably in 66 spring, went to China by way of the Minister of Agriculture of Pakistan because they had good contacts with China.
And then in 1974 when I asked some of the wheat scientists in western China, I said,
were and what were the first wheats that you saw with the type of dwarfing genes you're working with now.
You said they were your wheats that came to us from Pakistan.
And we also saw some of them in winter types that came from Korea.
Those were the two.
But this was long before there was any relations between the U.S.
and China or Mexico and China.
And so these things are interesting.
Science and technology isn't necessarily bound in by political ideology.
Many of them moved into and were used probably commercially, but we still don't have a good picture of that in South Russia also from India.
That's interesting too.
Why did you retire from the Senate in 1982?
79 the first time before then Glenn took over.
Glenn Anderson.
Yeah.
And then when he died I was an acting director again.
Until 82?
Yeah.
The reason I retired, this is a regulation of 65 of the Senate.
Not only Simmons, the network.
So you reach mandatory retirement age.
Right.
What were your thoughts when you retired?
Well, I wasn't very happy.
I don't retire very well.
No.
For that reason, I still keep working.
It's more difficult than
than ever because now I got more bosses.
Before I used to have one.
Now I get split up here part of the year, consultant for CIMIT part of the year, foundation a short time, visiting professor at Cornell a short time, and that's pretty hectic.
It's worse than before.
Because you, then you get many obligations that, for example, right here now, I didn't know this,
organization this morning.
You probably know it.
Here at Zalado, the Institute for the Humanities at Zalado.
Are you familiar with this?
Well, this is... Oh, out in West Texas.
Well, it's up here towards Temple, isn't it?
It's over here in Central.
Oh, yeah, okay.
Yeah, I've heard of this.
Yeah.
It turns out that Wilmer was the creative head of this.
He established it.
It's a kind of an intellectual institute.
They bring in a group of speakers on social issues of all kinds.
About three years ago, they had a big conference there with about a half a dozen speakers, and they eventually, Texas A&M Press published the book, and it was all dealing with the Vietnam War.
I didn't know that, but anyway, this guy, I don't remember.
He was at Minnesota.
He graduated a year after I did, and he took all his degrees there.
originally in liberal arts and then in medicine.
And then he was a fellow down at the Mayo Clinic for about six years before he came down here to, at the University of San Antonio and their medical staff.
And he too is retired now, he works part-time with them and he created this thing, I think he said seven or eight years ago, to kind of attempt to be a bridge to the
between the scientific professional people and the laymen, both young and elderly, on world issues.
I just thought this was in West Texas.
It's by Temple.
And I get tangled into a lot of these things.
I have to watch myself and I don't do it very well to restrict the things that I accept so that I don't get so damn frustrated that I never get anything done the way I want it.
Yeah, yeah.
I think we ought to stop right here and I think we ought to talk about world issues next time and the whole issue of American farm policy.
We've talked about five major themes during the 1970s and if you can think of any more.
Then we'll go into that next time, too.
But next Friday, I'd like to talk to you.
Can I make a note there?
Triticales.
That's a new crop.
I don't guess we talked about this.
We're trying to bring this thing.
How do you spell it?
T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E-S.
I got interested in this way back in... And how do you pronounce it?
Triticales.
Pretty chaotic.
Okay.
Do you want to talk about, is that another aspect about the 70s?
I mean, would you like to talk?
That's one of the major things.
Well, do you want to address that now, or would you rather wait till next Friday?
Maybe wait till the next time.
Okay, then we'll start off on that.
And then I want to talk to you about, well, we've got all kinds of issues that I've been thinking about with this credible farm problem that we've got in America, and all the different types of programs that have attempted to solve it,
I'd like to know about other things, world food shortages, Africa, genetic manipulation, things like that that are being used in animals today.
So there's all kinds of things that we'll talk about next time.